>> William Blake has a wonderful
way of defining a feminine.
If you can think of the
world of butterflies,
"He who binds to himself a joy,
doth the winged life destroy.
He who kisses the
joy as it flies
lives in eternity's sunrise."
I just think that's great.
I love that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Poetry resonates
throughout her very bones,
connecting to a soul
that lives within us all.
Marion Woodman is an
acclaimed author of 10 books,
eminent Jungian analyst
for almost three decades,
and revered teacher of
feminine development.
Using dreams, myths, and
fairy tales in combination
with intensive
body-soul work, Marion
mixes personal experience
with professional insight,
as she guides her students
on a quest for wholeness.
The daughter of a
United Church minister
raised in Ontario,
Canada, Marion
was a high school English and
drama teacher for 20 years.
She left teaching and spent
the next five years training
at the CG Jung
Institute in Zurich.
She knows from
personal experience
exactly what she teaches.
From anorexia and
addiction to healing
from life-threatening
cancer, Marion's work
epitomizes the struggle to unite
the body, soul, and spirit,
and the hard-earned
joy, freedom,
and wholeness that can be one.
She lives with Ross Woodman,
her husband of 42 years,
in their own little bit of
paradise in London, Ontario.
She has turned her
battle with cancer
and finding inner
balance into a testament
to the human spirit,
chronicled in her deeply
personal new book, "Bone--
Dying into Life."
Marion, before we
begin our conversation,
I want to tell you that this
is not work for me today.
I have read you and
followed you for so long.
This is following my bliss.
>> Oh, thank you.
Thank you so much.
>> Did you have to have a lot
of discussion with yourself?
Because you're so emotionally
available in "Bone"
to put it out there.
Did you have a--
>> Oh, a long, long, long--
I'm still discussing it.
>> There are men and women
watching this interview right
now who have cancer.
They will ask you.
So were you cured?
Did you heal?
And how did you do it?
How did you get to this point?
>> I think healing and curing
are very different things.
>> Really?
>> I think curing is the
scientific way of keeping you
alive.
You may go on living.
But if your soul hasn't
been part of the process,
you are not healed.
And if you try to
short circuit the soul,
something will
happen again that you
will have to deal with
soul, or at least the soul
will attempt once
again to come to you.
But heal means wholeness.
Healing is wholeness.
And to be whole, we have to
consider our soul and our body.
So the healing process is
when you bring in the soul
and say, OK, what do you want?
And you listen to what it wants.
>> How do we do that?
How do we listen to
our soul's request?
What's a step one would take?
>> Well, first of all,
try to get your dreams.
And if you've been cut off from
your dreams for a long time,
the unconscious doesn't
trust your consciousness.
Because you have been putting
it aside, maybe for years.
And every time the
soul tries to come up,
it just gets whacked down.
So if you can try
to get even a half
a line of a dream, one image,
and kiss it as it flies.
>> So you say in your books
our dreams are the rudder
of our unconsciousness.
Does that mean our
dreams can actually
tell us about our bodies?
>> Absolutely.
>> Really?
>> The dream comes
from the body.
It comes from the muscles
and the viscera of the body.
It's an impulse--
an energy impulse
that comes forward and
tries to find the image that
can communicate to
the mind, and so
that the image is coming
right from your body.
And it is the connector
between soul and body.
Psychoneuroimmunology is a
science that deals with that.
And the neurotransmitters
they now know
can take an image from the body
and change it into chemistry.
So that if you watch--
and they have proven this over
and over again with people
watching movies or
watching the news.
If you watch horrific
images, it is going
to affect your immune system.
And you're going to get up the
next morning feeling logged
down by darkness, because you've
got that in your chemistry now.
>> Well, what if we don't
remember our dreams?
So many people say, I'd like to,
but I don't remember my dreams.
>> Well, I think you have
to build up a trust with
the unconscious.
>> Do we all have them?
Do I have dreams?
>> Absolutely.
They say that the
reason people get
sick from not sleeping
is not so much the not
sleeping as the not dreaming.
Because the dream,
like the body at night,
tries to balance the health.
Your body-- if it's
tired and sick at night,
the sleep will balance
the body, right?
Or try to.
Similarity, the psyche
will try to find a balance.
So that process is going on, and
it is a sacred process, really.
It's amazing how it works.
>> You started to give me some
insight as to how we can make
an effort consciously
to remember our dreams.
>> Well, first of
all, I would say,
I really would like
to have a dream.
I would like to get a dream.
I honor my unconscious.
I would like to.
And maybe you could
spend 5 minutes or 10,
looking at a candle and
just letting yourself
surrender to that other world.
Now, mind you,
don't go to sleep.
But anyway, do something where
you are quiet in yourself
before sleep.
And then you drop
into that world.
You may only get the
nose of the little deer
if you imagine the
unconscious as a deer.
And you get the
nose coming over.
Because I believe the soul
has taken so many hits.
It just sometimes won't
come out for more,
till it puts its nose out.
And then the next night, you
write that down, by the way,
in your journal.
>> Dreamed I was walking
in a flower garden.
>> Yeah.
And the flower garden was where?
That's what's important.
Whose flower garden
were you walking in?
How old were you when you
knew that flower garden?
And what are the
flowers in that garden?
Do they have any particular
interest for you?
How old was I in the dream?
All that's very
important, right?
So you spend some
time working on that.
Then the next night, now you're
starting to get interested
in this serial, right?
So you then maybe get three
lines or maybe two lines.
And gradually, you
build up a confidence,
so you set up a dialogue
with the unconscious.
This happened to
me in daily life.
But here is the snapshot
version from the unconscious.
It's just as if the
unconscious has a camera,
snaps it from the
unconscious point of view,
and gives it to
you in the dream.
The dream reveals what
is going on in the body.
Now, mind you, it
also reveals what's
going on in the body-soul-spirit
connection as well.
But I am interested
in the shadow
that is lost in the body.
>> Define shadow.
Give me a visual image.
>> Shadow is the part
of ourselves that we
haven't lived.
We don't even know.
It's in the unconscious.
So the symptom gives you
the unconscious image.
>> Let me see if I understand.
When I was a little girl,
I would sit in school,
and I would move.
And the teacher would
say, Chantal, don't move.
So I'd sit like this.
Is that part of the shadow?
>> It depends on what you locked
into your body when she said
that.
>> Well, I don't dance.
Could that be it?
>> Well, maybe if your
soul wants to dance.
But it's the part
that's not lived.
You see?
And that's what part of my--
one of the biggest things
in my work is about.
You've got this-- if
you're living in your head
and you've got a perfect madonna
as your image of femininity,
what have you done with
the Mary Magdalene who's
the outcast from society?
>> You've stepped on her.
You've put her down.
>> You stepped her.
You put her down.
You probably don't
even know she's there.
And your husband
probably doesn't even
know that she's there.
So in the work
that I try to do--
try to bring the madonna off the
pedestal and the Magdalene up
and find that unity, which
is the real feminine.
>> A lot of your work
is about fairy tales.
My producer, Sheila, has
a nine-year-old daughter.
And one day her daughter, Leah,
asked such a great question.
She said, mom, why are all the
mothers dead in fairy tales?
>> That's a good
question all right.
>> It's a good question.
So what would you say to Leah?
>> Well, the fairy tale
is a picture of a culture.
And the feminine in
those days was dead,
as anybody writing
a fairy tale today
would have a dead
mother or a stepmother,
which is simply a word
for a negative mother.
And by negative mother,
I mean that we've
been talking about
that voice that says,
who do you think you are?
And instead of
bringing you into life
and bringing out and mirroring
you the very best that
is in you, she has an agenda.
And if you don't follow that
agenda, you're just no good.
>> Is it the same
as an absent mother?
>> Not exactly, because an
absent mother you could love.
If only mommy were here,
everything would be perfect.
You see?
So she couldn't be
the cherishing mother.
The positive mother
is the mother
who can put a child in
touch with its own body.
And it loves to just live.
And life is a birthright.
Sexuality is a birthright.
And because of the history of
the feminine for 2,000 years,
how many mothers can
give that to their child?
>> Not many.
Not many.
And although the mother loves
the child with all her heart,
she cannot give what
she hasn't got to give.
So the child grows up
with a dead mother.
>> If you've had a
negative mother in life,
are you saying that means you're
going to be a negative mother?
>> What isn't brought to
consciousness comes to us
as fate.
>> So unless you do the work.
>> Unless you do work,
it doesn't change.
And you see, because the
power of principle operates,
you don't want it to.
But you hear yourself
saying things
that you heard as a child.
And you're horrified
that you're saying them.
You say, I swore I would never
use that language to a child.
And here I am doing it, because
it's in the unconscious.
And if it isn't back
to consciousness,
you won't live it.
>> So let me be
sure I understand.
This is what you mean in "Bone"
where you talk about the idea
that our bodies are, in essence,
an instrument through which we
are forced to come
to consciousness.
>> That is right.
>> Yes?
>> That's how I see it.
>> So then your cancer was
your body forcing you to come
to a consciousness.
>> A new consciousness-- a
new level of consciousness.
And the body is saying, I
want to live my creativity.
And I know what the
potential is here.
And I want to go with
my destiny and live it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the late '60s,
while on a trip to India,
Marion came perilously
close to death.
For 20 years, she had
been waging her own battle
with anorexia, a
struggle she almost lost,
but one that eventually
led her to Jungian studies
in Zurich and dramatic
insights into addiction, which
ultimately saved her life.
In her book called
"Addiction to Perfection"
Woodman deals with this
life-changing experience.
>> I had this horrific
experience of going out
of my body, and ending
up on the ceiling,
and seeing my body on the
floor and thinking, poor, dumb,
stupid thing.
Don't you know you're dead?
I'm free.
You're dead.
>> Was that your soul up
there talking to your body?
>> That's right.
And if I wouldn't treat my dog
the way I'm treating that body.
And that was the
turning point for me.
But up until that point, I
had wanted out of my body
and into spirit.
And for me to be in spirit was
to be free of all this crap
from here down, and to try to
deal with the loss of control
in the body, and to deal with
the greed, and the jealousy,
and the anger, and the
sexuality, and a body
that I didn't like to look at.
>> When you started writing
about anorexia with "Addiction
to Perfection," one of the
themes in there I suddenly
understand, where you say
addictions destroy the instinct
for survival.
Is that what you're
talking about?
>> Yeah, exactly.
Because you move
into a perfectionist
mode where you are trying
to escape from life.
And the perfection
is a love of death,
because life is not perfect.
No human being is perfect.
No body is perfect.
But once you get in
that addicted mode,
you want the perfection
of whatever it
is you happen to be hooked on.
>> You lost me there.
Tell me what that means.
>> Every archetype
has two sides.
The archetype being that
God power that lives in us.
That any addict
knows that there's
a point where if you are
projecting onto food, mother,
the great mother
that you never had,
the loving, cherishing,
nurturing mother--
when you want mother, you
are going to have her.
You could wake up at 2
o'clock in the night.
Your ego is not functioning.
And there's this
little voice-- says,
I want to go to the
refrigerator now.
And you say, I'm going
to go back to sleep.
Well, I'm not.
I am going to the refrigerator.
We've always gone
to the refrigerator.
What's the matter with you?
Up.
And the voice
starts to drive you.
And you may taste
the first muffin.
But after that, it's
just wolfing food
if you're a binger.
And same with any addiction.
It eventually possesses you.
You are no longer present.
So the archetype is that immense
divinity, dark and light,
because it's satanic
as well as Godlike.
And it can just come up and
wipe out the ego completely.
So I could hear
Mozart when I was
hungry to the point of starving.
I never heard Mozart
before or after.
Or I could experience
the vitality of red
that you would never
under normal circumstances
experience it and dance all
night when you're not eating.
And you've got another
whole level of euphoria,
so that it was that euphoric
escape from life that I loved,
until I was faced with
actually being out.
And then I made a choice.
And I think most addicts at
some point are on their knees
at the wall.
And they choose
to live or to die.
>> I understand
now what spirit is.
But I would love an
example of something
that we could visualize today.
What would be an example of
spirit moving in the body?
>> Well, if you can
imagine Nureyev,
the great dancer of
the 20th century,
standing with his
perfectly prepared body,
that he's worked on every muscle
to bring to a perfect form.
And he's standing,
waiting for the music.
And the cord strikes and
something comes into him,
and he just lifts
off the ground.
He just opens-- totally
surrenders to spirit.
And the spirit is what
lifts soul and body.
And what you see going on the
stage is the intermarriage.
It's a communion of body,
soul, and spirit right there
in front of you.
>> Wonderful.
Now, I got it.
>> And it's the same,
Chantal, in writing.
I write every day in my journal.
But there are moments
when I suddenly
realize something else
is moving the pen.
And that's when spirit comes
in and takes over the pen,
and I surrender.
This is the feminine principle
surrendering to spirit, which
is the masculine principle.
And see, that's where I think
that the addict so often is
a spiritual person,
who is hooked in going
toward the material God,
rather than a spiritual God.
And the creativity is the
part that wants to live,
and it gets caught on
an addictive object.
And it's tragic,
because it's death.
I said to my soul, be still
and wait without hope,
for hope would be hope
for the wrong thing.
And wait without
love, for love would
be love of the wrong thing.
There is yet faith.
But the faith, and
the love, and the hope
are all in the waiting.
And do not think, for you
are not ready for thought.
So the darkness
shall be the light.
And the stillness-- the dancing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
"Pain has an element of blank.
It cannot recollect
when it began,
or if there were a
time when it was not.
It has no future but itself.
Its infinite contain
its past, enlightenment
to perceive new
periods of pain."
>> You say that for you,
a journal is a mirror.
How so?
>> When I was small, I didn't
have friends my own age who
understood what I was interested
in, or they didn't understand
my feelings.
So I played with
them, but then when
I wanted to commune with my own
inner feelings and my thoughts,
I wrote in my journal.
Because that way,
I got it outside.
And I could look at
it and say, oh, yeah.
That is what I think.
>> When you look at your
journals progress over
the years, of course, you
have such a great perspective
on your life.
Today is your life more complex
in some ways or is it simpler?
>> I'm getting older.
I have to simplify,
because I don't
have the physical strength
to hold everything together
that I once held together.
And I want more energy for
what is the essence of my life.
>> And what is the essence
of your life right now,
that you're conserving
your energy for?
>> Well, I am extremely
interested in my intensives
that I'm doing with women and
trying to make a safe space
where they can experiment
and experience who they are.
And the work is becoming
deeper and deeper and more
and more intense.
And I'm seeing more and more
the connection between the body,
and the soul, and the spirit.
>> Do a lot of women
come to you in pain?
>> That's all of them, I
would say, who come to me--
come in pain.
Otherwise, they wouldn't bother.
>> And their pain, I imagine,
would be about wanting
to please so many people all
the time, that in essence,
they lose sight not only
of pleasing themselves,
but who they are as a person.
>> That is right.
And that has been going on since
they were very, very young.
In fact, in dreams
when they go back--
when the dream takes
them back to probably
when they were
two or three, they
find a little
child there, buried
in the cellar
underneath the cellar
that they don't
even know exists.
And there they find
this little child
that they buried
when they started
pleasing everybody else.
And they say, who put
you in the cellar?
Who are you?
And the little one says,
I am in this cellar
because you put me there.
And you would have killed
me if I had come out.
You would have killed me.
So one has to then take
the responsibility,
you see, to bring that
child into adulthood.
>> You must see some
incredible changes in women.
>> Mind-blowing.
I mean, it comes through
huge pain, mind you.
Because I've seen
women trying to walk
across the floor in that new
sense of themselves and just
drop.
And I go to her.
And I say, well, what happened?
And they say the old
voice came in and said,
who do you think you are?
You'll get over this.
When you go home, you'll
realize this is just
another flaky thing
that you've been doing.
But don't get too sure
of who you think you are.
And that critical voice
is underneath everything
they attempt to do.
>> What is it that presses
down, depresses, squashes,
damages the feminine
that we have to find it?
Is it the masculine?
>> I don't think so, Chantal.
I don't think we have
any idea, really,
what the new masculine is that
will partner that feminine.
The masculine as we
know it is patriarchal.
And it is a parody
of the masculine.
It is a power principle.
It depends on controlling
somebody else,
or controlling your own
body, or controlling nature.
It can be even more potent
in a woman than in a man.
There is no room for the
feminine in the speed
at which we think we're a lot.
I mean, it's not living.
It pushes everything
into an abstraction
before we even experience it.
>> Yeah.
One of my favorite
passages in your new book
called "Bone" was
indeed where you do talk
about the way we live
today is at such a pace
that we are indeed blurring
our lives into an abstraction.
I not only agreed with it, I
wondered how I would slow down.
How do we do that?
>> Well, cancer slowed me down.
And I think heart attacks
slow a lot of people down.
It's as if the heart
just can't take
any more undigested feeling.
People don't take time
to digest their feelings,
to assimilate what
is happening to them.
I mean, you bury your
mother on Tuesday.
You're expected to be
back at work on Thursday.
It can't be that way with
the soul, with the heart.
And it's just a
tragedy of the culture
that the feminine is raped
in the body, in nature.
We just go on raping the earth.
And it seems to me
that's one of the things
that our 21st century
is going to be about.
And that is the
sacredness of matter.
Either we're going to learn it,
or we're not going to survive.
>> In "Bone," one of the things
you do that I love is you write
in the margins.
I mean, it's a real
journal we're reading.
You write pieces of
poetry and little notes.
I love one of them where
you define maturity
as loving without
losing identity.
That's one of the little notes,
one of the little snippets.
But one of them is
a piece of a poem
from Emily Dickinson that
begins, "The Soul has Bandaged
Moments."
>> Well, you see, Emily
Dickinson is masterful with
metaphor.
And if it hits exactly
the right place,
you just shudder from
the top to bottom.
It's one of those moments
of aha, it's right.
I know it's right.
>> Well, what do
the words mean--
"The Soul has Bandaged Moments?"
>> For me, it's those terrible
moments when the soul falters.
And something has hit so
deeply that it cannot take it
in, and it's paralyzed.
>> Can you read it to me?
>> Yeah.
It means different things
at different times, too.
"The soul has bandaged moments
when too appalled to stir.
She feels some
ghastly fright come up
and stop to look at her."
It's that combination
of the immensity
of what is happening and
stopped to look at her,
where she puts the divinity
and the human together.
And it's so frightening.
>> She has a way
of capturing pain.
>> She knew it so well.
>> There's another one.
Wow, you have the
book in your hands.
And I have Marion
Woodman in front of me.
There's another one called
"There is a pain so utter."
>> Oh, I could do that
would for you from heart.
>> Why am I not surprised?
>> "There is a pain so utter,
it swallows substance up,
then covers the
abyss with trance,
so memory can walk
around, across, upon it,
as one within a swoon goes
safely where an open eye would
drop him bone by bone."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is by my favorite
revolutionary poet, William
Blake, "The Tyger."
"Tyger!
Tyger!
burning bright in the
forest of the night.
What immortal hand or eye could
frame thy fearful symmetry?
In what distant deeps or skies
burnt the fire of thine eyes?
On what wings dare he aspire?
What the hand, dare
seize the fire?
And what shoulder
and what art could
twist the sinews of thy heart?
And when thy heart
began to beat,
what dread hand and
what dread feet?
What the hammer?
What the chain?
In what furnace was thy brain?
What the anvil?
What dead grasp dare thy
deadly terrors clasp?
When the stars threw
down their spears
and watered heaven
with their tears,
did he smile his work to see?
Did he who made
the Lamb make thee?
Tyger!
burning bright in the
forest of the night, what
immortal hand or eye dare
frame thy fearful symmetry?"
>> Let's go back a little bit.
Because we were talking about
how our body is an instrument
that forces us to come to
some kind of consciousness.
I want to know specifically,
what was the consciousness
that you came to with cancer?
Do you know what I was
about to say to you?
I was about to say, what
were you doing wrong
that you got cancer?
Was it something wrong?
>> I don't think it was wrong.
I don't believe in
people taking guilt
on when they get any illness.
It's not guilt. I mean, that
only compounds the difficulty.
That's that voice.
>> Exactly.
>> What is the matter with you?
Why did you get cancer?
What do you think?
What did you do wrong?
And it compounds the--
well, the immune system
just gets sicker and sicker.
That voice will pound the
life out of the immune system.
No, it's not that.
But the question for me was,
what can I learn from this now?
Why do I need to
experience this right now?
And what I've come to,
Chantal, more and more-- and I
don't think I'm anywhere
near the end of this yet.
The sheer joy of life,
and having faced death,
and going through that
over a period of two years,
am I ever going to
see another spring?
Will I ever see
another snowdrop?
Makes you see snowdrops.
And every day is grace--
literally a gift of God.
And the people I meet
and the smiles on their
faces, the children
I meet, my husband--
life is such a gift.
And the other thing
about it is that while I
have lost a lot of my physical
attributes, I have new eyes,
and I have new
ears, and new nose.
The senses are all operating
in another dimension,
which I call--
because it's been called that
for centuries-- subtle body.
So that I can hear Mozart's last
concertos and my heart breaks.
I read Lear.
And I think, how is it
possible for a human being
still on this side of the
veil to write such a thing?
It is so magnificent
in its simplicity.
>> I'm interested to know
the differences in terms
of the degree of loving--
how that has changed.
For example, how
do you love Ross
differently, right
now in this instant,
as you and I sit here,
than how you loved him,
say, 30 years ago?
How do you love him
today differently?
>> 30 years ago, I was
projecting my own soul onto
him.
And I wanted him to
be like my inner man.
And when he wasn't
like that inner man,
I was disappointed in him.
And so it didn't matter
what he did for me.
And he's a very
kind, loving person.
But it didn't
matter what he did.
It was never quite good enough.
So there was no way
he could measure up.
And when I got married,
I was in heaven.
I mean, it was stardom,
because I really
believed I was marrying
this inner beloved.
Now, it took 25
years to change that.
And my journey to
Zurich was part of that,
because the marriage
got rockier and rockier.
I think he also projected
the inner divine.
Most people do.
They project that perfection
in the first marriage
or in the first loving.
Then I came home from Zurich.
And I had been through
quite a bit there.
And we had seen each other
over there five years,
but it was a different person
that came home each time.
And I was sitting in
my little living room.
And he was attempting
to cook an egg in one
of those little poachers.
You put the egg in the top.
Well, I don't like people
around me in the morning.
I like to write in my
journal, work on my dreams,
and be silent, and find my
own center for this day.
And he was trying to
do this in the kitchen.
And I don't know
what went wrong,
but the egg sort of
fell out of the poacher.
And I thought, I really could
have done better than this.
What'd I come home to this for?
I could've been somebody.
And I was so unhappy.
>> Because of the egg?
Because of the egg.
And because he was--
little spindly legs
and an old watch--
black watch, house coat
he should have thrown out
years ago.
And there he was.
And then he put his
hand on a loaf of bread
and just the sheer humanity of
cutting that bread for himself.
And that hand that had planted
tulips with me, that had made
love to me, that had worked
with my dying mother--
I saw how exquisite
the human being is.
And I thought how
schizophrenic the world
is outside this apartment.
And here we are together
in the huge investment
that is in this relationship.
We don't lean on each other.
We walk parallel paths.
But we love each other as
we are in our humanity.
And that is noble in itself.
And my heart just broke open.
It just was like a flood
that came through me,
and it hit him.
And he just turned
around and said, Marion,
would you like some more coffee?
He got it.
He felt what it
was that hit him.
I mean, that's what love is.
It's not that sentimental
stuff you read about.
It's an energy.
When it lands, it
just comes like glue.
I don't mean that
it's sticky or that,
but it holds atoms together.
You say, what's the difference?
I treasure him as
I watch him now,
gathering his own soul
together for take-off.
And it's so beautiful to watch.
And we treasure every
day with each other,
because we know it
won't be our many days.
And I have no sense of
wanting to hold onto him.
I want to be free.
He wants to be free.
And we love each
other in that freedom.
>> You know how Joseph
Campbell used to say "follow
your bliss?"
>> Yes.
>> Is that where
you are right now?
>> My definition of bliss
is that you and destiny--
you and God are in sync.
>> And are you right now?
I'm not going to let
you get away with this.
I want to know what's
going on with you.
>> I think I'm going through
another threshold right now.
And I don't know quite
where it's taking me.
And as always, I'm nervous
about where it's taking me.
It may be into a much
more introverted life.
And that's OK if it
happens that way.
So when I say I'm
a little dubious--
the here and now, right in the
moment-- yes, I feel in sync.
Just looking a
little farther ahead,
I think I'm already
in the transition.
>> Does it manifest
in your body?
How do you know you're
in a transition?
>> All of the old
stuff comes up.
You don't get away from it.
It comes up in eating patterns.
It comes up in swelling of the
body, holding on too tight,
and stopping the energy moving.
I see that.
And I can see it in my dreams.
>> Well, wherever you
go on your journey,
I want you to always
feel how much I love you.
>> Oh, thank you, Chantal.
>> Because I do.
>> It's been a wonderful time
and thank you so very much.
>> Thank you.
>> I think we are kindred souls.
Thank you.
>> Is there a poem that comes
to you as we stand here?
>> Well, I have an Emily
poem that I think of many,
many times in this garden.
"A sepal, petal, and a thorn
upon a common summer's morn,
a flash of dew, a bee or two,
a breeze, a caper in the trees.
And I'm a rose."
>> You certainly are.
>> And I'm a rose.
[MUSIC PLAYING]